Add EIP: Forward compatible consensus data structures (#8439)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7688.md

---
eip: 7688
title: Forward compatible consensus data structures
description: Transition consensus SSZ data structures to StableContainer
author: Etan Kissling (@etan-status)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-7688-forward-compatible-consensus-data-structures/19673
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
created: 2024-04-15
requires: 7495
---

## Abstract

> This EIP defines the changes needed to adopt [`StableContainer`](./eip-7495.md) in consensus data structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP defines the changes needed to adopt `StableContainer` from [EIP-7495](./eip-7495.md) in consensus data structures.
```

## Motivation

Ethereum's consensus data structures make heavy use of [Simple Serialize (SSZ)](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/ef434e87165e9a4c82a99f54ffd4974ae113f732/ssz/simple-serialize.md) `Container`, which defines how they are serialized and merkleized. The merkleization scheme allows application implementations to verify that individual fields (and partial fields) have not been tampered with. This is useful, for example, in smart contracts of decentralized staking pools that wish to verify that participating validators have not been slashed.

While SSZ `Container` defines how data structures are merkleized, the merkleization is prone to change across the different forks. When that happens, e.g., because new features are added or old features get removed, existing verifier implementations need to be updated to be able to continue processing proofs.

> [`StableContainer`](./eip-7495.md) is a forward compatible alternative that guarantees a forward compatible merkleization scheme. By transitioning consensus data structures to use `StableContainer`, smart contracts that contain verifier logic no longer have to be maintained in lockstep with Ethereum's fork schedule as long as the underlying features that they verify don't change. For example, as long as the concept of slashing is represented using the boolean `slashed` field, existing verifiers will not break when unrelated features get added or removed. This is also true for off-chain verifiers, e.g., in hardware wallets or in operating systems for mobile devices that are on a different software update cadence than Ethereum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`StableContainer`, of [EIP-7495](./eip-7495.md), is a forward compatible alternative that guarantees a forward compatible merkleization scheme. By transitioning consensus data structures to use `StableContainer`, smart contracts that contain verifier logic no longer have to be maintained in lockstep with Ethereum's fork schedule as long as the underlying features that they verify don't change. For example, as long as the concept of slashing is represented using the boolean `slashed` field, existing verifiers will not break when unrelated features get added or removed. This is also true for off-chain verifiers, e.g., in hardware wallets or in operating systems for mobile devices that are on a different software update cadence than Ethereum.
```

### Conversion procedure

For each converted data structure, a new `StableContainer` type `S` is introduced that serves as the primary definition of each data structure.

- Each `StableContainer` is assigned a capacity to represent its potential design space that SHALL NOT change across future forks; if it is later determined that it is insufficient, a new field can be added to contain additional fields in a sub-container.
- The historical forks are examined and fields that have not been present in all forks are marked as `Optional` in the new `StableContainer` type.
- To guarantee forward and backward compatibility, new fields from future forks MUST be appended to the end of the `StableContainer` definition. Existing fields MAY be converted to `Optional`.

Furthermore, a `Variant` type is defined that is specific to the fork at which the conversion is applied. This `Variant` is the equivalent of the legacy `Container` type, except that it inherits from `Variant[S]`. The SSZ serialization of `Variant` is compatible with `Container`, but the merkleization and `hash_tree_root` are computed differently. Furthermore, `Variant` MAY use fields of `Optional` type if necessary.

> libp2p topics still exchange fork specific `Variant` definitions using the same serialization as the legacy `Container` type. Only merkleization and `hash_tree_root` are computed differently.

Reviewer 2: Not just libp2p, but all processing will be done with Variants, right? For spec purposes, just for better type safety.

    gas_limit: uint64
    gas_used: uint64
    timestamp: uint64
    extra_data: ByteList[MAX_EXTRA_DATA_BYTES]
    base_fee_per_gas: uint256
    # Extra payload fields
    block_hash: Hash32  # Hash of execution block
    transactions: List[Transaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    withdrawals: Optional[List[Withdrawal, MAX_WITHDRAWALS_PER_PAYLOAD]]
    blob_gas_used: Optional[uint64]
    excess_blob_gas: Optional[uint64]
    ...  # Additional features from the fork that introduces this EIP

class StableExecutionPayloadHeader(StableContainer[MAX_EXECUTION_PAYLOAD_FIELDS]):
    # Execution block header fields
    parent_hash: Hash32
    fee_recipient: ExecutionAddress
    state_root: Bytes32
    receipts_root: Bytes32
    logs_bloom: ByteVector[BYTES_PER_LOGS_BLOOM]
    prev_randao: Bytes32
    block_number: uint64
    gas_limit: uint64
    gas_used: uint64
    timestamp: uint64
    extra_data: ByteList[MAX_EXTRA_DATA_BYTES]
    base_fee_per_gas: uint256
    # Extra payload fields
    block_hash: Hash32  # Hash of execution block
    transactions_root: Root
    withdrawals_root: Optional[Root]
    blob_gas_used: Optional[uint64]

>     excess_blob_gas: Optional[uint64]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    excess_blob_gas: Optional[uint64]
    ... # Additional features from the fork that introduces this EIP
```

class StableBeaconBlockBody(StableContainer[MAX_BEACON_BLOCK_BODY_FIELDS]):
    randao_reveal: BLSSignature
    eth1_data: Eth1Data  # Eth1 data vote
    graffiti: Bytes32  # Arbitrary data
    # Operations
    proposer_slashings: List[ProposerSlashing, MAX_PROPOSER_SLASHINGS]
    attester_slashings: List[AttesterSlashing, MAX_ATTESTER_SLASHINGS]
    attestations: List[Attestation, MAX_ATTESTATIONS]
    deposits: List[Deposit, MAX_DEPOSITS]
    voluntary_exits: List[SignedVoluntaryExit, MAX_VOLUNTARY_EXITS]
    sync_aggregate: Optional[SyncAggregate]
    # Execution

>     execution_payload: Optional[ExecutionPayload]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    execution_payload: Optional[StableExecutionPayload]
```

    # Eth1
    eth1_data: Eth1Data
    eth1_data_votes: List[Eth1Data, EPOCHS_PER_ETH1_VOTING_PERIOD * SLOTS_PER_EPOCH]
    eth1_deposit_index: uint64
    # Registry
    validators: List[Validator, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    balances: List[Gwei, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    # Randomness
    randao_mixes: Vector[Bytes32, EPOCHS_PER_HISTORICAL_VECTOR]
    # Slashings
    slashings: Vector[Gwei, EPOCHS_PER_SLASHINGS_VECTOR]  # Per-epoch sums of slashed effective balances
    # Participation
    previous_epoch_participation: List[ParticipationFlags, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    current_epoch_participation: List[ParticipationFlags, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]
    # Finality
    justification_bits: Bitvector[JUSTIFICATION_BITS_LENGTH]  # Bit set for every recent justified epoch
    previous_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    current_justified_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    finalized_checkpoint: Checkpoint
    # Inactivity
    inactivity_scores: Optional[List[uint64, VALIDATOR_REGISTRY_LIMIT]]
    # Sync
    current_sync_committee: Optional[SyncCommittee]
    next_sync_committee: Optional[SyncCommittee]
    # Execution

>     latest_execution_payload_header: Optional[ExecutionPayloadHeader]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    latest_execution_payload_header: Optional[StableExecutionPayloadHeader]
```

    block_number: uint64  # 'number' in the yellow paper
    gas_limit: uint64
    gas_used: uint64
    timestamp: uint64
    extra_data: ByteList[MAX_EXTRA_DATA_BYTES]
    base_fee_per_gas: uint256
    # Extra payload fields
    block_hash: Hash32  # Hash of execution block
    transactions: List[Transaction, MAX_TRANSACTIONS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    withdrawals: List[Withdrawal, MAX_WITHDRAWALS_PER_PAYLOAD]
    blob_gas_used: uint64
    excess_blob_gas: uint64
    ...  # Additional features from the fork that introduces this EIP

class ExecutionPayloadHeader(Variant[StableExecutionPayloadHeader]):
    # Execution block header fields
    parent_hash: Hash32
    fee_recipient: ExecutionAddress
    state_root: Bytes32
    receipts_root: Bytes32
    logs_bloom: ByteVector[BYTES_PER_LOGS_BLOOM]
    prev_randao: Bytes32
    block_number: uint64
    gas_limit: uint64
    gas_used: uint64
    timestamp: uint64
    extra_data: ByteList[MAX_EXTRA_DATA_BYTES]
    base_fee_per_gas: uint256
    # Extra payload fields
    block_hash: Hash32  # Hash of execution block
    transactions_root: Root
    withdrawals_root: Root
    blob_gas_used: uint64

>     excess_blob_gas: uint64

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    excess_blob_gas: uint64
    ... # Additional features from the fork that introduces this EIP
```

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Conversion procedure

For each converted data structure, a new `StableContainer` type `S` is introduced that serves as the primary definition of each data structure.

- Each `StableContainer` is assigned a capacity to represent its potential design space that SHALL NOT change across future forks; if it is later determined that it is insufficient, a new field can be added to contain additional fields in a sub-container.
- The `StableContainer` starts as a copy of the latest fork's `Container` equivalent.

> - To guarantee forward and backward compatibility, new fields from future forks MUST be appended to the end of the `StableContainer` definition. Existing fields MAY be converted to `Optional`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- To guarantee forward and backward compatibility, new fields from future forks MUST only be appended to the `StableContainer` definition. Existing fields MAY be converted to `Optional`.
```
just a nit
